Getting readyHaving registered and secured your place by following the centre’s advice about payment etc., you might want to do some more preparation. This book will be helpful in showing what to expect and if you would like more in-depth discussion of teaching ideas, the books mentioned in the introduction are the standard recommendations. But there is more that you can do to get ready. It depends on your starting point… No teaching experienceIf you have little or no teaching experience, you are who the course was designed for originally. Though you will likely meet candidates who do have experience, you should not consider this a weakness. The CELTA is a pre-service course and teaches the basics. You might consider:  •       finding some English lessons you could observe (eg. at a local language school).•       remembering your own second language learning experience. •       taking some classes if you have never studied another language. •       remembering the language difficulties you’ve had when travelling abroad.•       talking to friends whose first language is not English about their experience of learning. •       recall occasions when you had to teach somebody another skill.•       think about your personality and what kind of teacher you might be. Already teachingIf you have experience of the classroom already, then you may have some advantages. For example, you may be less nervous about working with students. The environment and some ideas and techniques will be familiar and you should have some idea of the difficulties teachers and students face. You might try to think about: •       observing colleagues and being observed. •       identifying your current strengths and weaknesses in teaching. •       any habits that the CELTA may encourage you to break. •       how you will receive feedback from tutors and other (maybe less experienced) trainees. •       whether you are ready to re-evaluate your previous work in light of CELTA training.  English is your first languageThose who grew up speaking English are likely to be confident in their use of the language (knowing what you say is correct) but less confident in their explicit understanding of grammar and vocabulary (knowing why what you say is correct). This is normal and to be expected. These users of English may have an advantage in their range of vocabulary and their instinctively correct pronunciation but will find it harder to describe grammatical rules. You could:  •       ask if your centre runs a pre-CELTA language awareness course or take one online. •       study one of the following books:?       Practical English Usage, by Michael Swan?       Grammar for English Language Teachers, by Martin Parrott?       English Grammar in Use, by Raymond Murphy. English is not your first languageThose who learned English through formal study are more likely to be confident in their explicit understanding of grammatical rules and also have an understanding of students’ experience with the language.  You should try not to worry too much about your own English once you have been accepted. But you may think about:  •       how much time you’ve spent recently in exclusively English speaking environments. •       ways of practising your reading/listening skills to keep up with the course.•       your note-taking and writing skills in English.•       your experience/expectations of working with others in an international group.  What to bringMost centres will have a library of reference books available for CELTA trainees to use, so it’s not necessary to pack a lot. This book gives a basic overview of key ideas in methodology and a brief introduction to language analysis. If you would like more depth and detail than is provided in Part II and Part III, then the typical recommendation are the Scrivener, Harmer, Parrott, Swan and Thornbury books mentioned in the introduction. It shouldn’t be necessary to have more than one each of a methodology book (Scrivener, Harmer, Thornbury) and one language reference (Parrott, Swan).  Other practicalities include stationery, notebooks etc.. As a rule, anything that is for your own use, you should bring with you. Centres usually provide what’s necessary in the classroom (eg. board pens, coursebooks etc.).  The centres generally have a resource room which includes access to computers, books and printing/copying facilities. Although it is common for the CELTA to be better provided for than many working teachers’ rooms, some candidates still express frustration at not getting access to a computer at the moment they want it. This can be solved through good organisation of time and cooperation with peers but most people will be happiest if they also have their own laptop with them. Those who do not have their own computer will be reliant on the school’s resource room (and opening hours) and the limited availability at any given time.  Dress codeIt is worth asking your centre whether they have strong expectations of teachers’ clothing. Asia and the Middle East tend to expect more formal dress in the classroom than Europe, often whether you are teaching or not. This may include shirt and tie with formal shoes for men and for women formal clothing which avoids revealing more than local customs dictate. It’s best to check in advance.   Other obligations, responsibilities and appointmentsDue to the often mentioned intensity of the full-time course and the heavy workload, it is important that candidates are prepared to focus exclusively on this course for the duration. It is advised in the strongest terms that you should not expect to continue work in another job during the course and family responsibilities like being the primary care-giver of a young child. These things are likely to seriously jeopardise a candidate’s success on the course. To give yourself the best opportunity to do well, eliminate other demands on your time as much as is possible.  Many candidates choose to take the course abroad as this is the easiest way for them to avoid the distraction of existing relationships. Some take the precaution of warning friends and family that they will be less available for the period. Whatever the extent of adjustment required, it is important that you have considered this and are aware.  Having made such preparations and committed fully to the course, you put yourself in a better position to be successful and also make it more likely that any unexpected but absolutely necessary external needs will be met with more understanding by the tutors managing the course. 